Episode3 add workflow steps#117 (#268)
carpentries-incubator/deep-learning-intro: _episodes/03-monitor-the-model.md

- "Separate training, validation, and test sets allows monitoring and evaluating your model."
- "Batchnormalization scales the data as part of the model."
---

> In this episode we will explore the concept of hyperparameter tuning using a more complicated weather data-set.

Reviewer: I would say this episode is not just about hyperparameter tuning.
```suggestion
In this episode we will explore how to monitor the training progress, evaluate our the model predictions and finetune the model to avoid over-fitting. For that we will use a more complicated weather data-set.
```

## 1. Formulate / Outline the problem: weather prediction

Here we want to work with the *weather prediction dataset* (the light version) which can be
[downloaded from Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5071376).
It contains daily weather observations from 11 different European cities or places through the
years 2000 to 2010. For all locations the data contains the variables ‘mean temperature’, ‘max temperature’, and ‘min temperature’. In addition, for multiple locations, the following variables are provided: 'cloud_cover', 'wind_speed', 'wind_gust', 'humidity', 'pressure', 'global_radiation', 'precipitation', 'sunshine', but not all of them are provided for every location. A more extensive description of the dataset including the different physical units is given in accompanying metadata file. The full dataset comprises of 10 years (3654 days) of collected weather data across Europe.

![18 locations in the weather prediction dataset](../fig/03_weather_prediction_dataset_map.png)

>  A very common task with weather data is to make a prediction about the weather sometime in the future, say the next day. In this episode, we will try to predict tomorrow's sunshine hours, a challenging-to-predict feature, using a neural network with the available weather data for one location: BASEL.  

Reviewer: Makes sense to put this here!

Overfitting also happens in classical machine learning, but there it is usually interpreted as the model having more parameters than the training data would justify (say, a decision tree with too many branches for the number of training instances). As a consequence one would reduce the number of parameters to avoid overfitting.
In deep learning the situation is slightly different. It can - as for classical machine learning - also be a sign of having a *too big* model, meaning a model with too many parameters (layers and/or nodes). However, in deep learning higher number of model parameters are often still considered acceptable and models often perform best (in terms of prediction accuracy) when they are at the verge of overfitting. So, in a way, training deep learning models is always a bit like playing with fire...

> ## 9. Tune hyperparameters

Reviewer: Like we discussed I feel it would more sense to rename this step to 'Refine the model'. 

I think in machine learning practice hyperparameter tuning or hyperparameter optimization is an automated process of finding the best hyperparameters. The simplest way to to this is a grid search. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperparameter_optimization

'Refining the model' would feel better in this case, because we are **manually** changing hyperparameters of the model (with a conceptual framework in mind). Of course the automated hyperparameter tuning is a subset of 'finetuning the model'.

If you agree, you can create an issue for renaming this step everywhere in the lesson material.

> {:.solution}
{:.challenge}

### Watch your model training closely

As we saw when comparing the predictions for the training and the test set, deep learning models are prone to overfitting. Instead of iterating through countless cycles of model trainings and subsequent evaluations with a reserved test set, it is common practice to work with a second split off dataset to monitor the model during training.
This is the *validation set* which can be regarded as a second test set. As with the test set, the datapoints of the *validation set* are not used for the actual model training itself. Instead, we evaluate the model with the *validation set* after every epoch during training, for instance to stop if we see signs of clear overfitting.
Since we are adapting our model (tuning our hyperparameters) based on this validation set, it is *very* important that it is kept separate from the test set. If we used the same set, we wouldn't know whether our model truly generalizes or is only overfitting.   

> > ## Test vs. validation set

Reviewer: Yes, this makes sense
